# SAX

SAX stands for Simple API for XML, and was originally a Java API for reading XML. (Full details at [http://saxproject.org](http://saxproject.org)). SAX implementations exist for most common modern computer languages.

FoX includes a SAX implementation, which translates most of the Java API into Fortran, and makes it accessible to Fortran programs, enabling them to read in XML documents in a fashion as close and familiar as possible to other languages.

SAX is a stream-based, event callback API. Conceptually, running a SAX parser over a document results in the parser generating events as it encounters different XML components, and sends the events to the main program, which can read them and take suitable action.

### Events

Events are generated when the parser encounters, for example, an element opening tag, or some text, and most events carry some data with them - the name of the tag, or the contents of the text.

The full list of events is quite extensive, and may be seen below. For most purposes, though, it is unlikely that most users will need more than the 5 most common events, documented here.

* `startDocument` - generated when the parser starts reading the document. No accompanying data.
* `endDocument` - generated when the parser reaches the end of the document. No accompanying data.
* `startElement` - generated by an element opening tag. Accompanied by tag name, namespace information, and a list of attributes
* `endElement` - generated by an element closing tag. Accompanied by tag name, and namespace information.
* `characters` - generated by text between tags. Accompanied by contents of text.

Given these events and accompanying information, a program can extract data from an XML document.

### Invoking the parser.

Any program using the FoX SAX parser must a) use the FoX module, and b) declare a derived type variable to hold the parser, like so:

       use FoX_sax
       type(xml_t) :: xp

The FoX SAX parser then works by requiring the programmer to write a module containing subroutines to receive any of the events they are interested in, and passing these subroutines to the parser.

Firstly, the parser must be initialized, by passing it XML data. This can be done either by giving a filename, which the parser will manipulate, or by passing a string containing an XML document. Thus:

      call open_xml_file(xp, "input.xml", iostat)

The `iostat` variable will report back any errors in opening the file.

Alternatively, 

      call open_xml_string(xp, XMLstring)

where `XMLstring` is a character variable.

To now run the parser over the file, you simply do:

     call parse(xp, list_of_event_handlers)

And once you're finished, you can close the file, and clean up the parser, with:

     call close_xml_t(xp)

#### Options to parser

It is unlikely that most users will need to operate any of these options, but the following are available for use; all are optional boolean arguments to `parse`.

* `namespaces`  
Does namespace processing occur? Default is `.true.`, and if on, then any non-namespace-well-formed documents will be rejected, and namespace URI resolution will be performed according to the version of XML in question. If off, then documents will be processed without regard for namespace well-formedness, and no namespace URI resolution will be performed.

* `namespace_prefixes`
Are `xmlns` attributes reported through the SAX parser? Default is `.false.`; all such attributes are removed by the parser, and transparent namespace URI resolution is performed. If on, then such attributes will be reported, and treated according to the value of `xmlns-uris` below. (If `namespaces` is false, this flag has no effect)

* `validate`
Should partial validation be performed? Default is `.false.`, no validation checks are made, and the influence of the DTD on the XML Infoset is ignored. (Ill-formed DTD's will still cause fatal errors, of course.) If on, then a limited amount of validation will be performed, and the Infoset modified accordingly. (Validation will be incomplete if any external subset or entities are referenced.)

* `xmlns_uris`
Should `xmlns` attributes have a namespace of `http://www.w3.org/2000/xmlns/`? Default is `.false.`. If such attributes are reported, they have no namespace. If `.true.` then they are supplied with the appropriate namespace. (if `namespaces` or `namespace-prefixes` are `.false.`, then this flag has no effect.)


### Receiving events

To receive events, you must construct a module containing event handling subroutines. These are subroutines of a prescribed form - the input & output is predetermined by the requirements of the SAX interface, but the body of the subroutine is up to you.

The required forms are shown in the API documentation below, but here are some simple examples.

To receive notification of character events, you must write a subroutine which takes as input one string, which will contain the characters received. So:

    module event_handling
      use FoX_sax
    contains
       
      subroutine characters_handler(chars)
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: chars

        print*, chars
      end subroutine
    end module

 That does very little - it simply prints out the data it receives. However, since the subroutine is in a module, you can save the data to a module variable, and manipulate it elsewhere; alternatively you can choose to call other subroutines based on the input.

So, a complete program which reads in all the text from an XML document looks like this:

    module event_handling
      use FoX_sax
    contains
       
      subroutine characters_handler(chars)
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: chars

        print*, chars
      end subroutine
    end module

    program XMLreader
      use FoX_sax
      use event_handling
      type(xml_t) :: xp
      call open_xml_file(xp, 'input.xml')
      call parse(xp, characters_handler=characters_handler)
      call close_xml_t(xp)
    end program

### Attribute dictionaries.

The other likely most common event is the startElement event. Handling this involves writing a subroutine which takes as input three strings (which are the local name, namespace URI, and fully qualified name of the tag) and a dictionary of attributes. 

An attribute dictionary is essentially a set of key:value pairs - where the key is the attributes name, and the value is its value. (When considering namespaces, each attribute also has a URI and localName.)

Full details of all the dictionary-manipulation routines are given in AttributeDictionaries(|AttributeDictionaries|), but here we shall show the most common.

* `getLength(dictionary)` - returns the number of entries in the dictionary (the number of attributes declared)

* `getQName(dictionary, i)` (where `i` is an integer) returns a string containing the QName of the `i`th attribute.

* `getValue(dictionary, i)` (where `i` is an integer) returns a string containing the value of the `i`th dictionary entry (ie the value of the `i`th attribute.

* `hasKey(dictionary, key)` (where `key` is a string) returns `.true.` or `.false.` depending on whether an attribute named `key` is present.

* `hasKey(dictionary, URI, localname)` (where `URI` and `localname` are strings) returns `.true.` or `.false.` depending on whether an attribute with the appropriate `URI` and `localname` is present.

* `getValue(dictionary, URI, localname)` (where `URI` and `localname` are strings) returns a string containing the value of the attribute with the appropriate `URI` and `localname` (if it is present)

So, a simple subroutine to receive a startElement event would look like:

    module event_handling

    contains
       
     subroutine startElement_handler(URI, localname, name,attributes)
       character(len=*), intent(in)   :: URI  
       character(len=*), intent(in)   :: localname
       character(len=*), intent(in)   :: name 
       type(dictionary_t), intent(in) :: attributes

       integer :: i

       print*, name
      
       do i = 1, len(attributes)
          print*, getQName(attributes, i), '=', getValue(attributes, i)
       enddo

      end subroutine startElement_handler
    end module

    program XMLreader
     use FoX_sax
     use event_handling
     type(xml_t) :: xp
     call open_xml_file(xp, 'input.xml')
     call parse(xp, startElement_handler=startElement_handler)
     call close_xml_t(xp)
    end program
     
Again, this does nothing but print out the name of the element, and the names and values of all of its attributes. However, by using module variables, or calling other subroutines, the data could be manipulated further.


### Error handling

The SAX parser detects all XML well-formedness errors. By default, when it encounters an error, it will simply halt the program with a suitable error message. However, it is possible to pass in an error handling subroutine if some other behaviour is desired - for example it may be nice to report the error to the user, and carry on with some other task.

In any case, once an error is encountered, the parser will finish. There is no way to continue reading past an error.

An error handling suubroutine works in the same way as any other event handler, with the event data being an error message. Thus, you could write:

    subroutine error_handler(msg)
      character(len=*), intent(in) :: msg

      print*, "The SAX parser encountered an error:"
      print*, msg
      print*, "Never mind, carrying on with the rest of the calcaulation."
    end subroutine

----------

## Full API

### Derived types

There is one derived type, `xml_t`. This is entirely opaque, and is used as a handle for the parser.

### Subroutines

There are four subroutines:

* `open_xml_file  
  type(xml_t), intent(inout) :: xp  
  character(len=*), intent(in) :: string  
  integer, intent(out), optional :: iostat`

This opens a file. `xp` is initialized, and prepared for parsing. `string` must contain the name of the file to be opened. `iostat` reports on the success of opening the file. A value of `0` indicates success.

* `open_xml_string  
   type(xml_t), intent(inout) :: xpi  
   character(len=*), intent(in) :: string`

 This prepares to parse a string containing XML data. `xp` is initialized. `string` must contain the XML data.

* `close_xml_t  
   type(xml_t), intent(inout) :: xp`

This closes down the parser (and closes the file, if input was coming from a file.) `xp` is left uninitialized, ready to be used again if necessary.

* `parse  
  type(xml_t), intent(inout) :: xp  
  external :: list of event handlers  
  logical, optional, intent(in) :: validate`

  This tells `xp` to start parsing its document. 

(*Advanced: By default, this will be done in a non-validating way, testing only for well-formedness errors. However, if `validate` is set to true. FoX will attempt to diagnose validation errors. Note that FoX is not a full validating parser, and will not read external entities, so do not rely on this behaviour*)

The full list of event handlers is in the next section. To use them, the interface must be placed in a module, and the body of the subroutine filled in as desired; then it should be specified as an argument to `parse` as:   
  `name_of_event_handler = name_of_user_written_subroutine`  
Thus a typical call to `parse` might look something like:

      call parse(xp, startElement_handler = mystartelement, endElement_handler = myendelement, characters_handler = mychars)

where `mystartelement`, `myendelement`, and `mychars` are all  subroutines written by you according to the interfaces listed below.

--------

## Callbacks.

All of the callbacks specified by SAX 2 are implemented. Documentation of the SAX 2 interfaces is available in the JavaDoc at [http://saxproject.org](http://sax_project.org), but as the interfaces needed adjustment for Fortran, they are listed here.

For documentation on the meaning of the callbacks and of their arguments, please refer to the Java SAX documentation.

* `characters_handler  
      subroutine characters_handler(chunk)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: chunk  
      end subroutine characters_handler`

Triggered when some character data is read from between tags. 

NB Note that *all* character data is reported, including whitespace. Thus you will probably get a lot of empty `characters` events in a typical XML document.

NB Note also that it is not required that large chunks of character data all come as one event - they may come as multiple consecutive events.

* `endDocument_handler   
      subroutine endDocument_handler()      
      end subroutine endDocument_handler`

Triggered when the parser reaches the end of the document.

* `endElement_handler  
      subroutine endElement_handler(namespaceURI, localName, name)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: namespaceURI  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: localName  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: name   
      end subroutine endElement_handler`

Triggered by a closing tag.

* `endPrefixMapping_handler  
      subroutine endPrefixMapping_handler(prefix)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: prefix  
      end subroutine endPrefixMapping_handler`

Triggered when a namespace prefix mapping goes out of scope.

* `ignorableWhitespace  
      subroutine ignorableWhitespace_handler(chars)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: chars  
      end subroutine ignorableWhitespace_handler`

Triggered when whitespace is encountered within an element declared as having no PCDATA. (Only active in validating mode.)

* `processingInstruction_handler  
      subroutine processingInstruction_handler(name, content)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: content  
      end subroutine processingInstruction_handler`

Triggered by a Processing Instruction

* `skippedEntity_handler  
      subroutine skippedEntity_handler(name)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
      end subroutine skippedEntity_handler`

Triggered when either an external entity, or an undeclared entity, is skipped.

* `startDocument_handler  
      subroutine startDocument_handler()  
      end subroutine startDocument_handler`

Triggered when the parser starts reading the document.

* `startElement_handler  
      subroutine startElement_handler(namespaceURI, localName, name, attributes)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: namespaceUri  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: localName  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: name  
        type(dictionary_t), intent(in)   :: attributes  
      end subroutine startElement_handler`

Triggered when an opening tag is encountered. (see LINK for documentation on handling attribute dictionaries.

* `startPrefixMapping_handler  
      subroutine startPrefixMapping_handler(namespaceURI, prefix)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: namespaceURI  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: prefix  
      end subroutine startPrefixMapping_handler`

Triggered when a namespace prefix mapping start.

* `notationDecl_handler  
      subroutine notationDecl_handler(name, publicId, systemId)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: publicId  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: systemId  
      end subroutine notationDecl_handler`

Triggered when a NOTATION declaration is made in the DTD

* `unparsedEntityDecl_handler  
      subroutine unparsedEntityDecl_handler(name, publicId, systemId, notation)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: publicId  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: systemId  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: notation  
      end subroutine unparsedEntityDecl_handler`

Triggered when an unparsed entity is declared

* `error_handler  
      subroutine error_handler(msg)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: msg  
      end subroutine error_handler`

Triggered when a [error](http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/#dt-error) is encountered in parsing. Parsing will cease after this event.
(NB Note that according to the XML specification, 
parsers MAY recoved continue parsing after an error. FoX will not.)

Note that FoX is not entirely compliant with the standard; both normal
errors and fatal errors will be reported through the error_handler; fatalError_handler
below is currently inactive.

* `fatalError_handler  
      subroutine fatalError_handler(msg)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: msg  
      end subroutine fatalError_handler`

Triggered when a [fatal error](http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/#dt-fatal) is encountered in parsing. Parsing will cease after this event.

Note that FoX is not entirely compliant with the standard; both normal
errors and fatal errors will be reported through the error_handler above; fatalError_handler
is currently inactive.

* `warning_handler  
      subroutine warning_handler(msg)  
        character(len=*), intent(in)     :: msg  
      end subroutine warning_handler`

Triggered when a parser warning is generated. Parsing will continue after this event.

* `attributeDecl_handler  
      subroutine attributeDecl_handler(eName, aName, type, mode, value)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: eName  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: aName  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: type  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: mode  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: value  
      end subroutine attributeDecl_handler`

Triggered when an attribute declaration is encountered in the DTD.

* `elementDecl_handler  
      subroutine elementDecl_handler(name, model)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: model  
      end subroutine elementDecl_handler`

Triggered when an element declaration is enountered in the DTD.

* `externalEntityDecl_handler  
      subroutine externalEntityDecl_handler(name, publicId, systemId)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: publicId  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: systemId  
      end subroutine externalEntityDecl_handler`

Triggered when a parsed external entity is declared in the DTD.

* `internalEntityDecl_handler  
      subroutine internalEntityDecl_handler(name, value)   
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: value  
      end subroutine internalEntityDecl_handler`

Triggered when an internal entity is declared in the DTD.

* `comment_handler  
      subroutine comment_handler(comment)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: comment  
      end subroutine comment_handler`

Triggered when a comment is encountered.

*  `endCdata_handler  
      subroutine endCdata_handler()  
      end subroutine endCdata_handler`

Triggered by the end of a CData section.

* `endDTD_handler  
      subroutine endDTD_handler()  
      end subroutine endDTD_handler`

Triggered by the end of a DTD.

* `endEntity_handler  
      subroutine endEntity_handler(name)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
      end subroutine endEntity_handler`

Triggered at the end of entity expansion.

* `startCdata_handler  
      subroutine startCdata_handler()  
      end subroutine startCdata_handler`

Triggered by the start of a CData section.

* `startDTD_handler  
      subroutine startDTD_handler(name, publicId, systemId)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: publicId  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: systemId   
      end subroutine startDTD_handler`

Triggered by the start of a DTD section.

* `startEntity_handler  
      subroutine startEntity_handler(name)  
        character(len=*), intent(in) :: name  
      end subroutine startEntity_handler`

Triggered by the start of entity expansion.

-----------

### Exceptions.

Although FoX tries very hard to  work to the letter of the XML and SAX standards, it falls short in a few areas.

* Unicode support is completely absent. It is unfortunately impossible to implement Unicode reading in standard Fortran 95. FoX will work perfectly well on documents of any encoding that only contain characters equivalent to those in US-ASCII, but its behaviour on documents containing other characters is not well-defined.

(This includes non-ASCII characters present only by character reference.)

It will, however, happily accept documents labelled as UTF-8 encoded.

* XML specifies that all SYSTEM IDs reported by events should be converted to URIs before the application receives them. FoX does no such conversion, and as a result, will allow through invalid SYSTEM IDs.

* FoX performs no checking on the validity of Namespace URIs.

Beyond this, any aspects of XML and SAX which FoX fails to do justice to are bugs.

Note that (as permissable within XML) FoX acts primarily as a non-validating parser, and thus all constraints marked as Validity Constraints by XML-1.0/1.1 are ignored by default. A subset of them will be picked up by FoX's validation mode, but only a small subset.

Note also that FoX will not read external entities when processing an XML document.

---------------------

### What of Java SAX 2 is not included in FoX?

The difference betweek Java & Fortran means that none of the SAX APIs can be copied directly. However, FoX offers data types, subroutines, and interfaces covering a large proportion of the facilities offered by SAX. Where it does not, this is mentioned here.

org.sax.xml:

* Querying/setting of feature flags/property values for the XML parser.  
* XML filters - Java SAX makes it possible to write filters to intercept the
flow of events. FoX does not support this.  
* Namespace configuration - SAX 2 allows changing the ways in which namespaces are interpreted  
by the parser. FoX supports only the SAX 2 default.
* Entity resolution - SAX 2 exports an interface to the application for entity resolution, but  
FOX does not - all entities are resolved within the parser.
* Locator - SAX 2 offers an interface to export information regarding object locations within the document, FoX does not.  
* XMLReader - FoX only offers the parse() method - no other methods really make sense in Fortran.  
* AttributeList/DocumentHandler/Parser - FoX only offers namespace aware attributes, not the pre-namespace versions.  

org.sax.xml.ext:

* Attributes2 - FoX does not implement these attribute-declaration querying functions   
* EntityResolver2 - see above   
* Locator2 - not implemented  

org.sax.xml.helpers:

* None of these helper methods are implemented.
